[Music]
13 State Department
the formal intelligence organization of
the Department of State began with the
liquidation of the Office of Strategic
Services quote by an executive order of
September 20th 1945 President Truman
terminated the Office of Strategic
Services and transferred its research
and analysis branch and presentation
branch to an interim research and
intelligence service in the Department
of State at the same time there was
established the position of special
assistant to the Secretary of State in
charge of research and intelligence
acting secretary Dean Acheson announced
on September 27th the appointment of
colonel alfred mccormick director of
military intelligence in the War
Department as special assistant to set
up the new agency Colonel McCormick
explained the work of the department's
agency as mainly a research program the
intelligence needed by the State
Department
he declared is primarily information on
the political and economic factors
operating in other countries of the
world and on the potential effect of
those factors in relations with this
government he estimated that
approximately 1,600 OSS personnel were
transferred to state a number soon
reduced by about 50 percent two offices
were created an office of research and
intelligence under dr. Sherman Kent with
five geographical intelligence divisions
corresponding roughly to the
department's geographic organization and
the office of intelligence collection
and dissemination under Colonel George
our fearing who had served with
distinction as an intelligence officer
with the army Colonel McCormick
indicated that most of the work would be
done in Washington but that from fifty
to seventy-five representatives with
special training would be attached to
embassies overseas to do particularly
McCormick cited the report made on the
transportation system of North Africa
which was invaluable to the American
forces of invasion and a study of the
industrial organization and capacity of
Germany once created
intelligence program underwent a series
of revisions and modifications for
example established as a self-sufficient
intelligence unit on a geographic basis
the service was changed in April 1946 in
accordance with the so called Russell
plan so that the geographic intelligence
functions were transferred to the
political offices thereby limiting the
functions of the office of intelligence
and research to matters which cut across
Geographic lines at the same time an
office of intelligence coordination and
liaison was established to formulate in
consultation with the geographic and
economic offices a departmental program
for basic research the day after the
departmental regulations making this
radical change were issued Colonel
McCormick resigned on the ground that he
regarded the new organization as
unworkable and unsound and felt that it
would make impossible the establishment
of a real intelligence unit within the
department On February 6th 1947 the
original type of organization was
reinstituted when the office of
intelligence and liaison was changed to
the office of intelligence research and
the geographical divisions were restored
to its jurisdiction end quote
while a variety of reorganizations have
shaped the unit during the succeeding
years the bureau of intelligence and
research which the component has been
designated since 1957 is the principal
intelligence agency of the state
department the status however should be
qualified the State Department does not
engage in intelligence collection other
than the normal reporting from
diplomatic posts in foreign countries
though it has provided cover for CIA
staff attached to u.s. diplomatic posts
as one authority has commented quote the
Department of State since world war ii
serves as a minor producer and major
consumer within the new intelligence
community and quote holding status
equivalent to that of an assistant
secretary the director of the bureau
functions as senior intelligence adviser
to the Secretary of State
eight departmental representative on the
US intelligence board and chief of the
intelligence staff at state recently
reorganized in 1975 the Bureau is
composed of two directorates and three
supporting offices these are quote the
Directorate for research organized into
five regional units Africa American
republics East Asia and Pacific Europe
and the Soviet Union Near East and South
Asia three functional components
economic research and analysis strategic
affairs political military and theatre
forces and the Office of the geographer
the Directorate is responsible for
finished intelligence products the
Directorate for coordination consisting
of an office of intelligence liaison
office of operations policy and office
of resources policy conduct Slee Azon
and clearances with other agencies of
the federal government on matters of
departmental intelligence interest
activity policy impact and resource
allocation the office of the executive
director a support unit responsible for
administrative functions the office of
external research another support entity
which encourages and contracts for
non-governmental research in the
behavioral and social agencies and the
Office of Communications and Information
handling which in its support role
manages sensitive intelligence documents
security and operates the department's
watch center for monitoring
international crisis developments
footnote C u.s. Department of State INR
intelligence and research in the
Department of State Washington US
government print off Asst 1973 pages 13
through 19
[Music]
this is our hidden history